##What is existence: fundamentals to Christianity

The most obvious aspect of life is that we exist. And many would think this should be the end of the blog post but somehow we have confused what it means to exist and the existence of other things. 

Existence has multiple facets to it. Let’s start with a person and work outwards. Each person obviously has a physical body. This body works amazingly well as we have discovered in biology. This part of us keeps us alive and allows us to interact with the physical world. This physical body is totally unique to any other person in the world. However, each person has an essence which is common between all humans such that we can identify someone as a human despite them being unique and different from all other humans. 

Now, this is where it gets complicated. If something is created that means it was created for a purpose. It is not possible to create something without a purpose. Now the fact that all humans have the same essence must mean that we have either the same purpose or the purpose is derived in a similar way, yet because we have unique bodies, the way in which we will accomplish these purposes has to be different. 

The next important step is that we see God says we are his image bearers. Therefore, at the core of our essence and therefore purpose is to image God or to act like God. Since, God is not a physical being, our purpose can not be related to our physical attributes. For example, Catholics often talk about not being allowed to use contraception. They derive this idea from sex having an purpose of union and procreations. Therefore because contraception prevents procreation, it’s is sinful. This article is not going to argue about any that but rather just point out that that is outside the essence of God. Instead we derive purpose from God which amazingly turns out to be about those two things — creating and relationships. Therefore, we see sex (a physical attribute) be used to fulfill our purpose as opposed to something we derive purpose from. This is the right template to follow: how can we use our physical body and the physical world to fulfill God’s purpose for us. 

To continue this idea, other philosophers talk about every thing in the world having an essence and they go further and say therefore each thing has a purpose. They come to this conclusion by stating that we put things into categories and can tell which is which despite things being unique. However, this only categorizes God’s purpose for them. They do not show us our purpose but rather can be used to fulfill our God imaging purpose. Therefore, we should view things in this world as tools or obstacles. Each thing is either something that helps us achieve our purposes or hinders us. How and whether it is a tool or obstacle depends on a robust understanding of our purpose which is in a different blog post. 

Now, in addition to an essence and physical body, we also have a conscious. This conscious is the part of us that firstly realizes we exist but secondly allows us to have free will. This is the part of us that allows us to act according to our purpose or deviate to from it. Furthermore, our conscious is linked to our mind which has the ability to learn. This enables us to fulfill our purpose in a fuller way or better way. The less we know, the more instinctually we can fulfill our purpose. Furthermore, part of our purpose requires us to learn. 

If it wasn’t clear in the previous paragraphs, our essence, our physical body our mind and conscious are intrinsically linked. Therefore, we cannot separate them. We do not have the wrong body or the wrong mind etc. We are all fearfully and wonderfully made and knitted together in our mother’s womb by God specifically to fulfill God’s over arching purpose in a unique way that only each person can fulfill. To decide that any facet of us is not good is the equivalent of thinking that bringing a knife to gunfight is a good decision. 

At a 3000 foot view, many people exist and they are all trying to fulfill a God imaging purpose as well. Since our purposes all come from God, they must all ultimately work together to fulfill something great and beautiful. Therefore, if in fulfilling your purpose, you counteract the fulfilling of someone else’s purpose, clearly the way you are fulfilling your purpose is incorrect. The same holds if fulfilling one of your purposes counteracts the fulfillment of another of your purposes. 