## Welcome to My Blog

This is my blog and where I will post my thoughts on Christianity, life and God. I would like to state that I am not a pastor or anything close. I do not teach with authority and much of my stuff is probably wrong or incomplete at best. I am not even 25 yet, there is no way I can expect to think I understand theology, philosophy and sociology yet. The point here is not to argue with people or fight but rather to show my incomplete semi authentic thougths . As I get older and learn more, I will update and change blog posts such that they represent what I currently think and believe. There will be parts of this blog in which I will post ideas that I either do not believe or I am currently thinking about. The goal of this blog is to help people think and wrestle with different ideas as I do the same thing.

I have a part of this blog in which I include the books I have read and a rating out of 5 stars. Even a 5 star book does not necessarily mean I agree with everything that was said in the book, but rather that the book gave me many ideas and concepts to think about or proposed helpful and interesting solutions to problems. If I gave something a 1 star, that means that the book either introduced no new ideas or solutions to me or that I think the ideas and solutions proposed are false, problematic or destructive. I apologise for the vagueness of my booklist review.

I hope that this blog is helpful and fruitful. Any questions, comments, criticisms, and/or concerns can be sent to my email - (not yet).