##Love Paradox

Two blogs ago we talked on the meaning of life and how Genesis one and two flow together to bring out our purpose. We spoke about how Genesis two is more important but how we cannot attain that until we have developed enough to be able to properly fulfill our purpose of love and relationships and family which ultimately is just growing of self as we spoke about as well. Then last blog we talked about how this purpose goes wrong as we talked about the fall in Genesis three. Today, I want to talk about some of the complexities of this purpose which believe it or not can be examined in the story of Cain and Abel. It is like God knew what he was doing when he inspired the bible. The other crazy part is that we could do another series on Genesis one through 11 and we could dive deep without even getting into the meaning of life. Genesis is so deep and beautiful.

Anyway I digress. Nihilism is a common topic that people talk about in philosophy. Many people argue that life has no meaning and that everything is predetermined and so what is the point. This is on a grand scale, but on a smaller scale it looks far more like what Cain experienced. You may be wandering how this relates. Well, let us think about it. One of the most striking parts of the story with Cain and Abel is that Cain still makes a sacrifice. We like to gloss over the fact that Cain made a sacrifice and presume that it was so bad that he deserved to be punished. Now, if you are Cain after finding out your sacrifice was not good enough what might one of your first thoughts be? Yes, there are many options but one of them might be well why did I even make this sacrifice in the first place? You see in order to make a sacrifice — even a bad one — still requires effort. He could have said well I should have not even tried. I would have been in the same place as I am now except I could have had more fun in the past. Is this not the driving factor behind nihilism? That any work we put in now is not worthwhile so what is the point of putting work in in any case. 

Now you might object and say well Abel’s sacrifice was good enough and you would be absolutely right. I mean two blogs ago we showed what the meaning of life is. But here is the interesting part. Now remember when we read the bible, we need to make sure we are not assuming the bible is missing information. We like to add words to the bible that are not there. One thing that is not there is why Cain’s sacrifice is not good enough. All we know is that God said if he does what is right then he will be accepted. Yet, we still do not really know what he did wrong. In the text it says he gathered some of the fruit while Abel gathered fat portions. (There is clearly a link here between the sacrificial system that I do not yet know enough. More research needed). One important difference though is that Abel brought the first born while Cain did not. Now, if think about this on a  metaphorical level, what we see is that Abel gave his best while Cain did not. This is something useful to know but it has a number of complexities. The first one is: if you cannot give your best should we not do it at all? The second is how do we know if we have given our best. The third question could be what if we hit a situation where giving your first born is all you have. I am sure all of you went straight to thinking about Abraham and Issac there. This is exactly what the bible is all about. Taking these major themes and expanding on them. 

This becomes the crux of life. It is tough to be perfect — well impossible. This means that we are going to fail and sometimes it is not even our fault. Who knows why Cain did not produce a sacrifice worthy to God? Who knows if he even knew whether it was good enough or not? But is this not exactly where the complexities of life lie. Yes, sin prevents us from living out our purpose and ultimately, that is the reason given in this passage that cost Cain. You see there is no clear evidence in the text that God was even referring to the sacrifice when he said if you do what is right. It just said that God did not look favorably on his sacrifice. I think this is the key. We like to merge these two ideas. but they are two different things. One idea revolves around being accepted. The other idea is about doing a sacrifice. This is an important distinction. You see in life we have two options: we can either take the risk of achieving some purpose in life or we can live Hakuna Matata. I still love how people wear Hakuna Matata shirts when one of the main points of the Lion King was to show that that is not the point of life. It is like they did not see the whole movie. In any case, in the movie Simba is faced with the option, either he continues though life living like there are no worries or he must fulfill his purpose and try take down Scar. Now, I want to emphasize here that this is where the movie can sometimes miss reality by over exaggerating the success rate. How many times have we metaphorically tried to take down Scar and failed. How many times are you willing to try take down Scar before you just decide my Hakuna Matata life was more fun. The crazy part is that either way Timone and Pumba would have accepted Simba. He was not sinning by not taking down Scar but Rafiki (the monkey) did not look favorably on him. It is interesting how we can see two sides of God in Rafiki in that he accepted Simba but also did not look favorably on him.

Here is another thought though. How long could Simba have live in Hakuna Matata world until the lack of purpose in his life would have driven him to despair. Well in Cain’s case, not very long. And he even tried to take down Scar. This is the crux. We live in a world where we are trying to find purpose. We cannot find it solely in creating (job and money and power). We are also cannot find it solely in relationships (family friends and community). However, the second is more important at the end of the day. But sometimes we are not able to fulfill that purpose exactly right. This is why the loss of a job, or a broken relationship or rejection is so hurtful. It is why the first impulse we have when this happens is to get a rebound, drink alcohol, eat comfort food and binge Netflix. This is what Nihilism is. It is complete rejection of purpose. You will find that most people who end up shooting up campuses or something similar are people who have been so hurt by the world due to failure to sacrifice effectively enough such that they end up blaming the world and decide that the only solution is to get revenge on the world by causing as much chaos as possible. Starting to sound even more like Cain? 

The crazy part of the story of Cain and Abel is that after Cain kills Abel, God still shows some love to Cain as he says anyone who kills Cain will suffer vengeance seven times over. What a crazy statement. Why would God care about what happens to Cain? Well, the point of the story comes right here. God Accepts us and loves us regardless of how successful we are but God will use successful people differently. Furthermore, there is absolutely punishment for sin but there is also forgiveness and second chances. The encouragement from God is keep trying but you actually need to put some effort in. You need to try your best. 

This leaves one issue left to resolve. How do we handle the situations of rejection and failure. How do we handle that pain? The answer I believe is partly answered in Ecclesiastes.  There is this weird refrain in the book saying eat drink and be merry. The idea is that, life is hard and does have all these terrible things that may not even be our fault. Therefore, we should eat drink and be merry. But not at the expense of purpose. There is a balance between Hakuna Matata and fulfilling our purpose Another part of it is just a common theme in the bible. When we love people we take a risk. We do not know how it is going to work out. But taking that risk is more important than not. Otherwise, we could never have anything. When God created us he took the risk that we would not choose him. Therefore, we need to risk in the world. We need to love in this world. Yes, it hurts so much much when we face rejection or it fails. But this is where our purpose lies. Either we try to attain our purpose or we spiral into despair. 

Fundamentally, this life comes down to a simple analogy. How many times can you pick your self up after you fail to try again and achieve your purpose. If we view life in this perspective perhaps we can see failure in a different perspective. In the movie Meet the Robinsons, the family celebrates his success when he fails. Why, because they know the potentiality behind someone who tries. They realize that becoming a Goob or a Cain is the result of not trying. So perhaps our purpose in life has an added layer. Perhaps, our purpose is not just to achieve success in creating and relationships. Perhaps, our purpose has to do with trying to attain that. But when we do not do it well there are consequences and it hurts but at the end of the day is worth celebrating to some degree. And God seems to agree with that to some degree. He asks Cain why he is downcast and why he is angry. It is like God um come on seriously? You just told him he did not do a good job with his sacrifice. It reminds me of when a kid plays a bad soccer match and the parent tells them it was not good enough and then asks why the kid is sad and angry. In some sense it should almost be the opposite. The parent should be happy in some sense that the kid is sad and angry because then it means they took what you said seriously and will probably try harder next time (unless the parent has driven them into despair…  hint hint nudge nudge). If the kid was just happy it would be like the kid did not care. This is the point. Our purpose in life is to try and fail and pick ourselves up again until we succeed. And since life is so complicated and dynamic, this is a whole life learning curve that ultimately teaches us to be better people. 

In conclusion, eat drink and be merry but don’t fall into despair and do not jeopardize your future while in pain. Unfortunately, that is what Cain did. After a poor sacrifice, Cain’s life was not over. But after he killed Abel, god removed him from his plan and kicked him out the land. Find that balance. But ultimately this is a story asking us to pick ourselves up again and again even when life gets hard. I promise you, if God did not see anymore potential in you he would not let you live. While you are alive, God sees potential in you. (This is not the reason all people die).







