## My opinion on the predestination free will issue

Predestination originates out of the idea that God has to be sovereign and all powerful and all knowing. And since he is outside of time he knew at all instances which includes before the world began. This would imply that God knows who is going to Heaven and hell before we were born. More than that because God created all of us and knows that based on how he created us and organizes and runs the world, he in that sense decided or predetermined or predestined each of us to Heaven or hell. Now, if you read or heard many of my thoughts you would know that the traditional categories of Heaven and hell are not something I believe in. Nevertheless, one could still argue that because of the way God created us and knows everything, he therefore, predetermined us to do every action we do on earth. If we want to be consistent in how we understand predestination, we cannot just limit it to eternal destination. In fact, many predestination believers are willing to let God let us do things on our own choice such as sin (as they would say God could never cause someone to sin). Many of them would say God would let us choose a bunch of things but apparently not whether we want to follow him or not. 

To me this is a grave misunderstanding of belief. Choosing God or not is the central decision that ultimately affects every other decision we make. This means that choosing God becomes the only real choice we have since everything else is a derivative decision of that choice. In other words, if we cannot choose God (since that was predestined for us to choose or not from the beginning), then there quite simply is no free will. 

One might say then clearly there is no free will. So many people become stuck on that logic because that logic is so robust. However, there are parts of the Bible that suggest that we do have free will. We might even think that in life it would be unfair if we do not have free will and as we live it seems that there is free will. But someone with a logical mind using deduction will argue that despite the practicality of the free will claims mentioned above and it’s appearance to be true, the only possibility is that God must have predetermined our future and decision. This is certainly how my logical mind worked when I was an early Christian who understood the sovereignty of God. 

However, as I grew older I started to grow away from predestination not because of its seemingly unbeatable logic but because of the practicality of the free will belief and the seeming inconsistencies between the nature of God and his love vs the slavery like predestination. But I still could not beat the predestination sovereignty argument until I came across an idea. What if the first chapter of Genesis gives us insight into the answer? In the first chapter God creates all the world but then after creating humans he stops. He does not create, control us until we are in Heaven (or hell for that matter). He stops after he created us. To me what this implies is that God stopped controlling us after we were created. He let us make our own decisions. You see we often think that absolute power means complete control. However, as we study animals and human empires and the Bible we see that absolute control inevitably fails. Totalitarianism is in fact less powerful than reciprocal altruism. Would it not then be foolish to believe that God who we are made in his image and should follow would do something counter to what is good. Therefore, we see that it is in fact more powerful to limit control and exhibit love through free will. Therefore, I believe that God gives up some of his control in order to let us have free will as that results in a more powerful mode of being for God who by definition lives in the most powerful mode of being which is characterized by love. I have yet to think of a better analogy but this is somewhat analogous to having a test in class and someone giving you the answer sheet such that you could know all the questions and answers of the test but deciding not to look at it and do the test without knowing the questions. 

The practical implications of this belief are astounding. First it means that every act we make is dependent on whether we choose God or not. God represents everything that results in the ultimate betterment of ourselves while not choosing God is choosing sin. One can refer to the article on sin which gives more light on this. Now, given that every decision we make is a derivative of those two choices (which by the way is why the Bible constantly encourages us to choose the way of the spirit rather than flesh or choose the way of life rather than death or light than darkness), then the reason we make that choice is based on the hope and goal we have in the future. If we believe that God’s way is the best and that it will mold us and the community into its optimal dynamic state. 

Therefore, the most important thing to anyone’s belief system is who they want their community which includes themselves to look like as that is the main contributor to how people will act. Many people have desires and hopes and goals that are too small and therefore the decisions they make are often lacking the growth mindset necessary for ultimate joy. In fact, it is often these lesser goals that result in our sinful decisions as we are okay with less than the kingdom of Heaven. Often we are more looking for someone else to bring the kingdom of Heaven to us or expect others to act like the kingdom of Heaven yet are not actually making the effort to make our own lives like the kingdom of Heaven while bringing it to others as well. 

All of our habits (which I will emphasize the importance of rest) are key to this process as each decision we make, whether it’s cleaning the dishes or getting frustrated with a bad driver is part of this process. Some decisions have less of an impact and others more but if we make some decisions with the kingdom of Heaven in mind and others without we will have a life like everyone else but it will result in deficiencies within us and our community. This is by no means a path to a perfect and non suffering life rather a life to fulfillment and a better community. 

One major complication of this is that all the decisions we make that bring the kingdom of Heaven are not always obvious. Our goal may be to bring it but often we will do things we thought were right but turned out to be wrong. Our belief of the good might not be the true belief of the good. Therefore, we need to live life with humility and a genuine open mind and be willing to get out of our comfort zone in order to understand and experience things we did not before. 

Now, one of the big things we often fail to understand is the importance of our jobs. What we do when we work is generate productivity in our community and economy this is one thing that benefits everyone. The more money in the system the more money people have. Many Christians have this belief that working a job only fuels greed and is selfish but that is the opposite of what’s true. We should rather be encouraging everyone to work and work hard within a balanced life. The more productive we are in our job the better for the society we live in. 

Furthermore, our relationships are important we should not jeopardize friendships or family or significant others by working too hard. We should ensure we are balanced in that. Balance is incredibly key and is something that we have to figure out as we move on in life. When should I focus more on work and when should I focus more on relationships. This should be done without jeopardizing the future of either. 

So having an overarching belief in attaining the kingdom of Heaven results in us making the right choices which is choosing God resulting in salvation. Within this ultimate choice of choosing God, we make smaller choices. These can for the most part be grouped into being generous and productive as alluded to above. 
Therefore, we can make a lot of life decisions around those two principles. Is what we are doing helping us to be more productive or is it being generous within our relationships? Focusing on the immediate people and things around us in this case seems more important. Therefore, we should focus on our work ethic and desire to learn as well as train our dopamine cycle to reward us after doing good work in order to encourage ourselves to be productive. In addition, we should treat our family members and close friends with kindness and help them and bear with them wherever necessary. As we train ourselves to treat these people well we will see them treat us well back and create a happier core community. We will also see us treat people we don’t know or are not part of our life very much better as we are carving who we are into our nature. If we do these things in combination with appropriate rest we can start to see ourselves become a person we love. Our confidence will grow and our vision of who we can be will grow. This in term will encourage us to be an even better person and we will create an upward spiral of bringing the kingdom of God. 

Often in life bad things will happen. This can be due to our own mistakes or ignorance or others or bad luck and the sad realities of life. These times are stressful and they encourage us to turn our attention over to how bad our own life is. This process of focusing on how unlucky we are etc is the most destructive part about the trial. The reason for this is because it can cause us to feel nihilistic and hopeless. Whether it’s because we put in work and it didn’t result in what we wanted or whether it was because we were doing all these good things and bad luck in life crushed all the work that was done, these things make us wonder why we even tried. Why was it worth being a better person and bringing the kingdom of Heaven if the world would destroy it anyway? There is no doubt that these times are hard and that people should do a better job of comforting us and bearing with us but the Bible gives a solution to this that is mind blowing. It says in the midst of suffering we should focus on others. In 2 Corinthians 8 vs 1-2 it says: “We want you to know, brothers, about the grace of God that has been given among the churches of Macedonia, for in a severe test of affliction, their abundance of joy and their extreme poverty have overflowed in a wealth of generosity on their part.” The answer is not in shutting down and feeling sorry for ourselves but rather in continuing to persevere in our productivity and generosity. In fact, when we are in this stressful or hard time, it is when our true colors come out and we see how well we have truly trained ourselves to bring the kingdom of Heaven. Any shortcomings we have we should be humble about them and learn from them and continue to aim high at who we should be in those times. 

The next practical implication of choice and God sacrificing his own control gives us a glimpse at what totalitarianism is. Giving people choice is one of the most important aspects of love. In fact, when truth is freely chosen and comes into existence, that is the epitome of love. Life often seems easier when we are able to force people to do things. When that happens we know the result. But when we give them a choice to do something or not we do not know the result and often we will not like it. That is why it is easier for us to try and force someone to do something. We do this more often than we think. Whenever we manipulate someone or abuse them we are treating them as objects for our own personal gain without their true consent. True consent is important as it may be the best option to a slave when the other option may be death due to being kicked out. History and evolution has shown us time and time again that this doesn’t work. These smokers/businesses/regimes or friendships etc never last long and eventually fail. This is why if God was like this he would be self defeating. He would be doing something less than optimal. This is why if we give up control over others we will see genuine friendships and joy. This is what God wanted with us. Therefore, if he controlled our salvation how would there be any genuineness in our relationship with him for either a psychological or spiritual sense. If he controlled our salvation then how can we hope for the kingdom of Heaven when there is nothing genuine in our allegiance to this optimal state. It would be easier to see that we are being manipulated for God’s personal benefit. Many predestinationists believe we live in an illusion of choice. This would be like saying it’s okay to manipulate someone into giving you consent since they did not really freely choose it. God is not someone who manipulates. He is not a totalitarian. He is not out for solely his own desires. He wants ultimate joy for everyone and that is only available when we freely choose the ultimate truth which is God and his Kingdom. 

To sum up, although it might seem obvious to a logical mind that God who created everything and is outside of time would by definition predestine everything on Earth, we forget that God is loving and is willing to give up part of his control. The Hebrew word for this is ‘zumzum’. It comes from the idea that when a woman becomes pregnant, they give up a part of their own body to make space for something that also has free will and should not be controlled. God made a space for us to make decisions and these decisions are based on how big we think our God is and how great we think his kingdom of Heaven is. God is not a fascist leader even if he may know best for us. God knows that true worship or to say it differently true growth towards God’s kingdom only happens when we voluntary choose God over the fears and temptations of the world. This is exactly what was happening when the Israelites voluntarily chose to stare at the serpent on a pole while the snakes were attacking in the desert. Therefore, we voluntarily choose to take up our crosses and follow Jesus. Quite simply, without free will there is no love, there is no growth and there is no joy. God is a loving parent not a manipulative slave owner. 